KEP-1282: Requeue Strategy (#1311)
kubernetes-sigs/kueue: keps/1282-requeue-strategy/README.md

#### Proposed Sorting

The `pkg/workload` package could be modified to include a conditional (`if evictionReason == kueue.WorkloadEvictedByPodsReadyTimeout`) that controls which timestamp to return based on the configured ordering strategy. The same sorting logic would also be used when sorting the heads of queues.

Update the `apis/config/<version>` package to include `Creation` and `Eviction` constants.

### Test Plan

[X] I/we understand the owners of the involved components may require updates to
existing tests to make this code solid enough prior to committing the changes necessary
to implement this enhancement.

##### Prerequisite testing updates

<!--
Based on reviewers feedback describe what additional tests need to be added prior
implementing this enhancement to ensure the enhancements have also solid foundations.
-->

#### Unit Tests

Most of the test coverage should probably live inside of `pkd/queue`. Additional test cases should be added that test different requeuing configurations.

- `pkg/queue`: `Nov 2 2023` - `33.9%`

#### Integration tests

- Add integration test that matches user story 1.

> - Add an integration test to detect if flapping associated with preempted workloads being readmitted before the preemptor workload when `priorityPreemption: UseEvictionTimestamp` is set.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Add an integration test to detect if flapping associated with preempted workloads being readmitted before the preemptor workload when `requeuingTimestamp: Creation` is set.
```
?

Author: Good catch, updated.

considered stable.

If the feature you are introducing has high complexity, consider adding graduation
milestones with these graduation criteria:
- [Maturity levels (`alpha`, `beta`, `stable`)][maturity-levels]
- [Feature gate][feature gate] lifecycle
- [Deprecation policy][deprecation-policy]

[feature gate]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/feature-gates.md
[maturity-levels]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api_changes.md#alpha-beta-and-stable-versions
[deprecation-policy]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/deprecation-policy/
-->

## Implementation History

<!--
Major milestones in the lifecycle of a KEP should be tracked in this section.
Major milestones might include:
- the `Summary` and `Motivation` sections being merged, signaling SIG acceptance
- the `Proposal` section being merged, signaling agreement on a proposed design
- the date implementation started
- the first Kubernetes release where an initial version of the KEP was available
- the version of Kubernetes where the KEP graduated to general availability
- when the KEP was retired or superseded
-->

## Drawbacks

> When used with `StrictFIFO`, the `requeuingTimestamp: Creation` (front of queue) policy could lead to a blocked queue. This was called out in the issue that set the hardcoded [back-of-queue behavior](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/issues/599). This could be mitigated by recommending administrators select `BestEffortFIFO` when using this setting.

Reviewer: There are other drawbacks, for example, if you want to use waitForPodsReady to prevent jobs with invalid images to block the queue, then you would continuosly block the queue.
Until we have a proper mechanism to fail pods in this situation.
https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/122300

Author: Good callout, added an bullet point.

## Alternatives

> The same concepts could be exposed to users based on `FrontOfQueue` or `BackOfQueue` settings instead of `Creation` and `Eviction` timestamps. These terms would imply that the workload would be prioritized over higher priority workloads in the queue. This is probably not desired (would likely lead to rapid preemption upon admission when preemption based on priority is enabled).

Reviewer: make it a bullet point, since the next paragraph talks about a different alternative.

Author: Done

- [Summary](#summary)
- [Motivation](#motivation)
  - [Goals](#goals)
  - [Non-Goals](#non-goals)
- [Proposal](#proposal)
  - [User Stories (Optional)](#user-stories-optional)
    - [Story 1](#story-1)
  - [Risks and Mitigations](#risks-and-mitigations)
- [Design Details](#design-details)
  - [API Changes](#api-changes)
  - [Changes to Queue Sorting](#changes-to-queue-sorting)
    - [Existing Sorting](#existing-sorting)
    - [Proposed Sorting](#proposed-sorting)
    - [Preemption/Preemptor Flapping](#preemptionpreemptor-flapping)
  - [Test Plan](#test-plan)
      - [Prerequisite testing updates](#prerequisite-testing-updates)
    - [Unit Tests](#unit-tests)
    - [Integration tests](#integration-tests)
  - [Graduation Criteria](#graduation-criteria)
- [Implementation History](#implementation-history)
- [Drawbacks](#drawbacks)
- [Alternatives](#alternatives)
<!-- /toc -->

## Summary

Introduce new options that allow administrators to configure how Workloads are placed back in the queue after being after being evicted.

## Motivation

### Goals

Allow administrators to configure requeuing behavior based on the reason the Workload is being requeued.

### Non-Goals

## Proposal

> Make queue placement after preemption configurable at the level of Kueue configuration.

Reviewer: Why not per ClusterQueue? I guess it makes a lot of sense for WaitForPodsReady, because it's also a Kueue level configuration.
But I'm not sure about other eviction options. I guess it doesn't have to be the same for all.

Reviewer 2: As we may divide the resource to different teams by ClusterQueue, making it as the ClusterQueue level configuration can be beneficial in accommodating various scenarios.

Author: If it is implemented at the ClusterQueue level, what do you think is the best way to handle the sorting of heads across ClusterQueues?

Author: Kept in ConfigMap

### User Stories (Optional)

> #### Story 1

Reviewer 3: We only have one story here, whereas the proposal covers both scenarios of preemption and timeout eviction. Should we add another story here, or maybe we can narrow down the scope of the KEP to only `waitForPodsReady`? I would suggest the second approach if possible.

Reviewer: +1, if you plan to make the requeueing for other eviction mechanisms configurable, it needs to solve a valid use case. Otherwise, we can just focus on waitForPodsReady and leave other evictions as non-goals.

Consider the following scenario:

* A ClusterQueue has 2 ResourceFlavors.
* Kueue has admitted a workload on ResourceFlavor #2.
* There is a stock-out on the machine type needed to schedule this workload and the cluster autoscaler is unable to provision the necessary Nodes.
* The workload gets evicted by Kueue because an administrator has configured the `waitForPodsReady` setting.
* While the workload was pending capacity freed up on ResourceFlavor #1.

In this case, the administrator would like the evicted workload to be requeued as soon as possible on the newly available capacity.

### Risks and Mitigations

<!--
What are the risks of this proposal, and how do we mitigate? Think broadly.
For example, consider both security and how this will impact the larger
Kubernetes ecosystem.

How will security be reviewed, and by whom?

How will UX be reviewed, and by whom?

Consider including folks who also work outside the SIG or subproject.
-->

## Design Details

### API Changes

Add additional fields to the Kueue ConfigMap to allow administrators to specify what timestamp to consider during queue sorting based on the reason for eviction.

Possible settings:

> * `UseEvictionTimestamp` (Back of queue)

Reviewer 3: Is't it the other way round? UseEvictionTimestamp -> front of the queue?

Author: I meant `UseEvictionTimestamp` as the time in which to consider for entry to queue. Because the eviction would have occurred more recently than the initial `.metadata.creationTimestamp`, this would put the Workload at the "back of the queue" immediately following eviction. If you read this differently, perhaps it would be good to change the terminology.

* `UseCreationTimestamp` (Front of queue)

```yaml
kind: ConfigMap
metadata:
  name: kueue-manager-config
  namespace: kueue-system
data:
  controller_manager_config.yaml: |
    apiVersion: config.kueue.x-k8s.io/v1beta1
    kind: Configuration
    # ...
    requeueStrategy:

>       priorityPreemption: UseEvictionTimestamp

Reviewer 3: The `priorityPreemption` field suggests it is more generic, whereas it is only to choose the source of the timestamp. Maybe we can have `timestampSourceForPreempted` / `timestampSourceForEvicted`: `EvictionTimestamp` / `CreationTimestamp`? I'm wondering how in the currently proposed framework we will accumulate use cases where, for example, you want to go to the front of the queue (no matter the priority of timestamp).

>       podsReadyTimeout: UseCreationTimestamp

Reviewer: We consider multiple aspects for sorting, the timestamp being one of them.

Having `UseCreationTimestamp` as the name of the option seems to imply that we ignore any other aspects.

Maybe it should be something like:
```
requeueStrategy:
  podsReadyTimeout:
    timestampSource: Creation | Eviction
```

That is assuming we are going to offer configuration for every eviction mechanism, otherwise, I would put the setting under the existing `waitForPodsReady`:

```
waitForPodsReady:
  requeuingTimestamp: Creation | Eviction
```

Reviewer 2: I'm struggling to grasp how varying eviction methods could result in distinct types of queue sorting. Can you share some cases?

```

### Changes to Queue Sorting

#### Existing Sorting

Currently, workloads within a ClusterQueue are sorted based on 1. Priority and 2. Timestamp of Creation/Eviction.

```go
package queue

// ...

func queueOrdering(a, b interface{}) bool {
	objA := a.(*workload.Info)
	objB := b.(*workload.Info)
	p1 := utilpriority.Priority(objA.Obj)
	p2 := utilpriority.Priority(objB.Obj)

	if p1 != p2 {
		return p1 > p2
	}

	tA := workload.GetQueueOrderTimestamp(objA.Obj)
	tB := workload.GetQueueOrderTimestamp(objB.Obj)
	return !tB.Before(tA)
}
```

```go
package workload

// ...

func GetQueueOrderTimestamp(w *kueue.Workload) *metav1.Time {
	if c := apimeta.FindStatusCondition(w.Status.Conditions, kueue.WorkloadEvicted); c != nil && c.Status == metav1.ConditionTrue && c.Reason == kueue.WorkloadEvictedByPodsReadyTimeout {
		return &c.LastTransitionTime
	}
	return &w.CreationTimestamp
}
```

#### Proposed Sorting

> Add types that contain information about queue ordering strategy to the `apis/config/<version>` package. For example:

Reviewer 3: I feel this goes to deep into implementation details. Just stating that the ordering is configurable, and how should be enough, typically. Unless there is some important reason to include the code here.

Author: Good callout, I ended up implementing this in the ClusterQueue in the WIP PR #1318.

Reviewer: Indeed, most pieces of code should go away. Generally KEPs just need to describe the API surface and give at most pseudocode for the implementation.

      if s.RequeueOnPodsReadyTimeout == OrderOnEvictionTimestamp {
        return &c.LastTransitionTime
      } else {
        return &c.CreationTimestamp
      }
    case kueue.WorkloadEvictedByPreemption:
      if s.RequeueOnPriorityPreemption == OrderOnEvictionTimestamp {
        return &c.LastTransitionTime
      } else {
        return &c.CreationTimestamp
      }
    default:
      return &w.CreationTimestamp
  }
}

// ...

func getEvictionReason(w *kueue.Workload) string {
	if c := apimeta.FindStatusCondition(w.Status.Conditions, kueue.WorkloadEvicted); c != nil && c.Status == metav1.ConditionTrue {
    return c.Reason
  }
  return ""
}
```

#### Preemption/Preemptor Flapping

To address the [following concern](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/issues/1282#issue-1966106166):

> The case of preemption might be more tricky: we want the preempted jobs to be readmitted as soon as possible. But if a job is waiting for more than one job to be preempted and the queueing strategy is BestEffortFIFO, we don't want the preempted pods to take the head of the queue.
> Maybe we need to hold them until the preemptor job is admitted, and then they should use the regular priority.

> The `pkg/queue` package could have the existing `queueOrderingFunc()` modified to add sorting based on who is the preemptor (might need to add a condition to the Workload to track this).

Reviewer: It looks like my concern was unfounded.
We handle this problem here:
https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/blob/c2f21f4eaeb9393ab117cf836b90ca4b7b6951be/pkg/queue/cluster_queue_best_effort_fifo.go#L43

Basically, if the workload has preempted any workloads, it's put back in the queue immediately.

Since nothing changes about it and it will have a higher priority than the preempted workloads, it should be at the head of the queue.

```go
package queue 

// ...

> func queueOrderingFunc(s kueue.QueueOrderingStrategy) func(interface{}, interface{}) bool {

Reviewer 3: Similarly here, I don't see a need for the code. We typically just record the API in the `Design Details` section, and describe the mechanism / handling of the API.

Author: Thanks, I can remove this.

    pre2 := workload.IsPreemptor(objB.Obj)
    if pre1 != pre2 {
      return pre1
    }
    
    tA := workload.GetQueueOrderTimestamp(objA.Obj, s)
    tB := workload.GetQueueOrderTimestamp(objB.Obj, s)
    return !tB.Before(tA)
  }
}
```

```go
package workload

// ...

func IsPreemptor(w *kueue.Workload, s QueueOrderingStrategy) *metav1.Time {
  c := apimeta.FindStatusCondition(w.Status.Conditions, /* TODO: Condition */)
  return c != nil && c.Status == metav1.ConditionTrue && c.Reason == /* TODO: Reason */
}
```

### Test Plan

[X] I/we understand the owners of the involved components may require updates to
existing tests to make this code solid enough prior to committing the changes necessary
to implement this enhancement.

##### Prerequisite testing updates

<!--
Based on reviewers feedback describe what additional tests need to be added prior
implementing this enhancement to ensure the enhancements have also solid foundations.
-->

#### Unit Tests

Most of the test covarage should probably live inside of `pkd/queue`. Additional test cases should be added that test different requeuing configurations.

- `pkg/queue`: `Nov 2 2023` - `33.9%`

> #### Integration tests

Reviewer: There should be an integration test that resembles the scenario in story 1.

[maturity-levels]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api_changes.md#alpha-beta-and-stable-versions
[deprecation-policy]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/deprecation-policy/
-->

## Implementation History

<!--
Major milestones in the lifecycle of a KEP should be tracked in this section.
Major milestones might include:
- the `Summary` and `Motivation` sections being merged, signaling SIG acceptance
- the `Proposal` section being merged, signaling agreement on a proposed design
- the date implementation started
- the first Kubernetes release where an initial version of the KEP was available
- the version of Kubernetes where the KEP graduated to general availability
- when the KEP was retired or superseded
-->

## Drawbacks

When used with `StrictFIFO`, the `podsReadyTimeout: UseCreationTimestamp` (front of queue) policy could lead to a blocked queue. This was called out in the issue that set the hardcoded [back-of-queue behavior](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/issues/599). This could be mitigated by recommending administrators select `BestEffortFIFO` when using this setting.

## Alternatives

> The same concepts could be exposed to users based on `FrontOfQueue` or `BackOfQueue` settings instead of `UseCreationTimestamp` and `UseEvictionTimestamp`. These terms would imply that the workload would be prioritized over higher priority workloads in the queue. This is probably not desired (would likely lead to rapid preemption upon admission when preemption based on priority is enabled).

Reviewer 3: Yeah, I agree, `FrontOfQueue` might suggest you get to the front no matter what, but in the proposal it is only about breaking the tie within the same priority level.
